[Music]
hey remember back in the day when your
internet was connected through the phone
line ah the sound of dial-up still
haunts me in my sleep well we've come a
long way since then and chances are that
you're watching this video through Wi-Fi
right now so how did we get here anyway
just hopping in my time machine and I'll
show you the roots of Wi-Fi go way back
to the 1940s that's when a popular
Hollywood actress and inventor by the
name of Hedy Lamarr came up with a way
to prevent radio signals from being
tampered with that was a pretty
important goal since back then
radio-controlled torpedoes could easily
be intercepted and changed their course
which meant a huge fail for the Navy
submarines so she came up with the
brilliant idea of frequency hopping
signals where people who controlled them
could jump from one frequency to the
other and make those torpedoes
practically immune to radio interference
now grab your double net blazer and
let's fast-forward to the 1980s this is
when personal computers had begun to
enter our lives for good but at that
time computers were connected to the
Internet through the infamous Ethernet
cables seems to me like scientists were
getting tired of tripping over all those
cables since they decided they wanted to
start sending data using radio signals
however those early attempts were
unsuccessful since it all bounced back
on walls furniture and pretty much
anything that stood in a computers way
what scientists didn't know at the time
was that the problem had been solved a
decade before pcs were even invented it
all started back in the 1970s with
electrical engineer dr. John O'Sullivan
also known as the father of Wi-Fi at the
time he and his team were trying to
detect radio signals from distant black
holes on space and they came up with
complex equations called fast Fourier
transforms unfortunately they couldn't
detect those black holes and they put
all their equipment back on the
Elsbeth sit and collect dust
surprisingly 20 years later dr.
O'Sullivan and his co-workers decided to
give wireless networking a chance and
those forgotten complex equations would
play a key role in the invention of
Wi-Fi after a lot of experimentation
they took their fancy fast Fourier
transforms added them in the mixture
with the data equations they'd
previously tried to send over radio and
thus they formed the basis for the Wi-Fi
we all know and love today but again
that was just the basis later in 1996
they further developed their original
key pattern and by 1997 they finally
cracked the code and came up with the
first version of the 802 dot 1 1
protocol now this is where you go oh oh
well maybe you didn't catch what I was
saying among all that numeric
mumbo-jumbo ok so let's talk about the
name you're more familiar with Wi-Fi
what does it mean anyway I always
thought it was some sort of acronym or
abbreviation for two technical terms or
something but truth be told and that's
what we do here on bright side it
doesn't stand for anything here's how
the naming situation went down since
their first protocol the Wi-Fi Alliance
wanted to come up with a catcher name
than 802 dot 1 1 yeah good idea so they
hired some market savvy people to help
them with that and data Wi-Fi was born
Wi-Fi is a pun on the word - which means
- della T a technical term used for high
quality audio technology now imagine
walking into a cafe and asking the staff
for the password to the I Triple E 802
dot eleven anywho now that we've covered
all these decades and how we got to
where we are today let's take a look at
how Wi-Fi really works you already know
that wireless internet helps you send
and receive files pictures messages and
whatnot but did you know that this is
all via radio waves eighth don't forget
about Hedy Lamarr and dr. O'Sullivan I
told you all that stuff for a reason
yeah Wi-Fi uses radio waves to transmit
data between your router which is your
Wi-Fi source and your device or the
receiver these frequencies are measured
in gigahertz to put all the sciency
stuff behind that in layman's terms
imagine this you're sitting on the beach
enjoying the Sun and watching the waves
crash on the shore if you were to
calculate the time between each wave
crash you'd be calculating the frequency
of the way let's assume that the time it
takes for each wave to hit the shore is
one second that second is calculated by
Hertz in other words one Hertz equals
one second now 1 gigahertz equals 1
billion waves per second if you could
see that many ocean waves moving so fast
then you might want to scoot out of
there and head for the hills
so the frequencies Wi-Fi routers use are
2 point 4 or 5 gigahertz per second
which is why data gets transferred so
quickly to your phone when it comes to
speed the 5 gigahertz frequency sends
information faster over shorter
distances whereas the 2.4 gigahertz
router covers farther distances but go
slower you also have to keep in mind the
interference from other devices in our
homes that also use the 2.4 gigahertz
radio frequencies for example if you
have baby monitors garage doors
microwaves cordless phones and wireless
cameras they can interfere with your
Wi-Fi and this kind of interference can
reduce the speed or you might lose your
internet connection altogether uh-oh
hold off before you microwave some
popcorn while binging on some bright
side videos yeah although the latter 5
gigahertz wireless frequency has 23
channels available to send all your
information therefore it doesn't let any
of those home devices cause connectivity
issues when you turn your phone or
computer on and get on the internet all
the information you'd like to access is
broken down into binary code you've
probably heard of this computer language
made up of zeros and ones and when you
access something through Wi-Fi
that binary code is transformed into
wave frequencies if you're trying to
visualize how this process works exactly
think of it this way imagine you're
trying to send an embarrassing picture
you took on your birthday to your best
friend for a laugh when you hits in the
photo is broken down into smaller pixels
or packets and travels around different
routers until it reaches your friend
then these packets are quickly
reassembled like a puzzle and your
friend can finally see the photo and
giggle accordingly all that happens with
pretty much anything you try to send be
it videos recordings even my voice in
the animation you're seeing right now
whoa
mind blown shiver wonder what it'd be
like if we could see all these radio
frequencies swirling around the room I
picture myself sitting comfortably on
the couch watching cat videos I mean you
know getting work done of course and
suddenly all these waves become visible
and I can see everything I see the
little packets of data going from my
router to my phone all those pixels and
colorful frequencies drifting through
the air everything would be traveling
around me like a long exposure photo in
slow motion kind of like a little
rainbow storm right in my living room
now I know what you're thinking okay
maybe I don't but I can take a guess if
we're truly surrounded by all these
radio waves what does it do to our
health is Wi-Fi dangerous well the short
answer is no Wi-Fi works at extremely
low voltages even at short distances
Wi-Fi is just part of the household smog
that's generated by TV and radio signals
Wi-Fi uses non-iodized away vlinc sub
radiation that are harmless to the human
body the Sun on the other hand uses
iodized irradiation wavelengths or
ultraviolet rays that aren't so good for
you in fact it's more dangerous for your
body to go outside than it is if you
just sit next to your Wi-Fi router great
I think I'll keep myself planted on the
couch then and to put your mind at ease
a bit more according to the World Health
Organization there is no scientific
evidence to confirm that
exposure to low levels of
electromagnetic fields has any negative
effects on our health okay now that
we've all calmed down and taken off our
aluminum foil hats let's talk about why
your Wi-Fi signal drops in certain
places around your house Wi-Fi works
just like light and sound the further
you are away from the router the less
energy you get a typical router works at
about 100 feet in every direction as for
what can block it that's pretty much
anything that conducts electricity like
metal water mirrors and even our bodies
since they mainly consist of water for
example if you stand between your router
and your device you might notice a
signal drop sometimes even thick brick
walls and concrete can hinder the signal
he just probably won't notice the
difference since it's teeny tiny another
highly technical scientific measurement
just smaller than a tab and there you
have it folks now you know a little more
about the Wi-Fi you spend hours and
hours on each day perhaps you'll
appreciate it that much more especially
if you were around during the dark days
of dial-up I still thank my lucky stars
each time I hop online within a fraction
of a second so are you as addicted to
Wi-Fi as I am let me know down in the
comments if you learn something new
today then give this video a like and
share it with a friend but don't go
anywhere just yet
we have over 2,000 cool videos for you
to check out all you have to do is pick
the left or right video click on it and
enjoy stay on the bright side of life